[DX-2375] docs: add Tyk Pump vs OpenTelemetry explanation page (#2008)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: api-management/observability/pump-vs-opentelemetry.mdx

---
title: "Tyk Pump vs OpenTelemetry: Choosing Your Observability Stack"
description: "Understand when to use Tyk Pump vs OpenTelemetry: how each works, what capabilities are exclusive to each, and how to choose the right tool for your setup."
sidebarTitle: "Pump vs OpenTelemetry"
keywords: ["tyk pump", "opentelemetry", "otlp", "analytics", "observability", "dashboard analytics", "otel metrics", "api monitoring", "comparison"]
---

Tyk provides two observability systems that can both be active simultaneously: **Tyk Pump** and **OpenTelemetry (OTel)**. They are not interchangeable. They solve overlapping but architecturally distinct problems, and the right choice depends on what you need to observe and where you need the data to go.

<Info>
Tyk Pump and OpenTelemetry can run simultaneously. They are not mutually exclusive, and many production deployments use both.
</Info>

## How Each System Works

> ### Tyk Pump

Reviewer: I think we should explain that there are a few different types of Pump - raw traffic records, aggregated records (a.k.a. analytics or, to use the OTel terminology, metrics), Prometheus metrics.

> Tyk Pump uses a pull-and-purge architecture. The Gateway writes raw analytics records to Redis after each request. Every 10 seconds, Pump reads those records from Redis, enriches them into structured documents with up to 40 metadata fields (including API key, OAuth ID, geo-data, network stats, and GraphQL query details), and writes them to a persistent backend such as MongoDB or PostgreSQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tyk Pump uses a pull-and-purge architecture. The Gateway writes raw traffic records to Redis after each request. Every 10 seconds, Pump reads those records from Redis and enriches them into structured metrics with up to 40 metadata fields (including API key, OAuth ID, geo-data, network stats, and GraphQL query details).

Pump writes these metrics to a persistent database in the Control Plane (such as MongoDB or PostgreSQL) or to an external backend such as Prometheus or Splunk.

Pump can also write the raw traffic records to the Control Plane database or external backend.
```

> This backend is the data source for the **Tyk Dashboard analytics screens**: Most Used APIs, Status Code Distribution, Activity by Key, and Activity by Location. Pump is the only component that can write data in the format the Dashboard requires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Control Plane database is the data source for the **Tyk Dashboard analytics screens** which use the metrics generated by Pump to display: Most Used APIs, Status Code Distribution, Activity by Key, and Activity by Location.

Pump is the only component that can write metrics in the format the Dashboard requires. [Tyk MDCB](/api-management/mdcb) embeds Tyk Pump and can be used to perform the same function.
```

> Enabling Pump analytics adds approximately 13% RPS reduction when tracking all requests. Use the [Do-Not-Track](/api-management/traffic-transformation/do-not-track) middleware to exclude non-critical endpoints and reduce overhead.

Author: 13% questionable metric

### OpenTelemetry

> OpenTelemetry instruments the Gateway at the span level. The Gateway emits traces, metrics, and logs via OTLP and sends them to an external collector such as a Prometheus scrape endpoint, Grafana Alloy, or a vendor agent (Datadog, New Relic, Dynatrace). From v5.13, the Gateway exports metrics natively via OTLP, removing the need for Tyk Pump as an intermediary for Prometheus-based observability.

Reviewer 2: it doesn't emit logs thru OTLP, that's not available yet.

Reviewer: Pump doesn't deal with logs either, so can probably miss that out here, as it's a comparison page.

> OpenTelemetry instruments the Gateway at the span level. The Gateway emits traces, metrics, and logs via OTLP and sends them to an external collector such as a Prometheus scrape endpoint, Grafana Alloy, or a vendor agent (Datadog, New Relic, Dynatrace). From v5.13, the Gateway exports metrics natively via OTLP, removing the need for Tyk Pump as an intermediary for Prometheus-based observability.

Reviewer 2: > OpenTelemetry instruments the Gateway at the span level

This is only for traces and if detailed_tracing is enabled - I'd say it instruments the Gateway proxied APIs

Reviewer: I'm not sure that "instruments the Gateway at the span level" makes sense.

Spans are combined to form traces, which are equivalent to the raw traffic records generated by Gateway.

Spans include identity attributes such as the hashed API key (`tyk.api.apikey`) and key alias (`tyk.api.apikey.alias`), which allow you to attribute traces to specific callers in your external observability tooling. OTel does not write to the Tyk Dashboard.

## Capability Comparison

<Warning>
OpenTelemetry cannot populate the Tyk Dashboard. The Dashboard relies exclusively on data written by Tyk Pump. If you need the built-in analytics screens, Pump is required regardless of your OTel configuration.
</Warning>

| Capability | Tyk Pump | OpenTelemetry |
|---|---|---|
| Tyk Dashboard analytics (Most Used APIs, Status Code Distribution, Activity by Key) | Yes — sole provider | No |

> | Per-request analytics record (up to 40 fields: geo, network stats, GraphQL stats) | Yes | No |

Reviewer 2: Not sure if I understand this.

Reviewer: I don't think this is correct.

Pump can transfer the (raw) traffic records - "per-request" - and in a separate instance, it can aggregate into different buckets (which I think are the "up to 40 fields").

| Raw request and response payload logging | Yes | No |
| GraphQL query-level analytics | Yes (Graph Pump) | No |

> | Per-API-key traffic attribution | Yes (Mongo Aggregate Pump) | Partial — spans include hashed key and alias; requires external tooling to aggregate |

Reviewer 2: Opentelemetry metrics are aggregations perse - you can configure OTLP metrics to aggregate per key

Reviewer: Terminology is a bit confused in this table.

To my understanding (@tbuchaillot please correct me!) the key things are:
- The aggregated Pumps (Mongo/SQL) generate the specific data required by "Dashboard Analytics"
- The non-aggregated Pumps (Mongo/SQL) transfer the "raw traffic records" (with or without payloads) to the Control Plane where they can be looked at in the Activity Log
- The dedicated external Pumps (Datadog, Splunk) transfer the raw traffic records to those services
- The metrics Pumps (think there's Prometheus and New Relic, but needs checking) transfers metrics to those systems (nothing to do with the traffic records)

OTel can do all of this (though it sends traces rather than traffic records) with the exception of the Mongo/SQL pumps that are sending data to the Control Plane (can't do that with OTel yet).

Reviewer 2: exactly @andyo-tyk

| Quota and billing metrics | Yes | No |
| Distributed traces (OTLP) | No | Yes |
| Metrics export to Prometheus, Datadog, Grafana (v5.13+) | No | Yes |

> | Structured log export via OTLP | No | Yes |

Reviewer 2: No

| External collector required | No — writes directly to database | Yes |
| Custom metric dimensions | No | Yes (self-managed only; 2,000 dimension combinations per instrument) |
| Performance overhead | ~13% RPS reduction when tracking all requests | Low to medium — configure sampling rate to control cost |

## When to Use Each

<Note>

> These are not mutually exclusive. The recommended production setup is to run both: Pump for Dashboard analytics and audit records, OTel for distributed tracing and metrics.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove this note - I don't think it's a good recommendation to use both so I'd prefer to omit this

Reviewer: They are independent, working on different data... at this point in time if the user wants to have "Dashboard Analytics" they have no option: Pump or MDCB.

The question is: do they want "Dashboard Analytics" or will they exclusively use their dedicated APM (in which case, they don't need Pump).

</Note>

**Use Tyk Pump when:**
- You use the Tyk Dashboard and need the built-in analytics screens.

> - You need quota reporting, API monetization, or per-key billing data.

Reviewer 2: not sure about this

- You need to log raw request and response payloads for compliance or debugging.
- You need GraphQL query-level analytics.
- You are on Tyk Cloud — Pump runs internally and is already active; no action required.

**Use OpenTelemetry when:**
- You need distributed tracing across multiple upstream services.
- You are integrating with an existing observability stack (Prometheus, Grafana, Datadog, Jaeger, or similar).
- You need Prometheus-compatible metrics without an additional analytics pipeline (v5.13+).
- You are on Tyk Cloud v5.13+ and want to enable metrics export via the Cloud UI toggle.

> - You need configurable sampling to control observability overhead at scale.

Reviewer 2: If traces * are enabled
